June 5, 2008
As the morning of Paris was young and beautiful the time we met! You were leading your first fight. That day, you met the glory and since then she and you are no longer gone. How could I have imagined that fifty years later we would be there, face to face, and that I was addressing you for a last goodbye? This is the last time I speak to you, the last time I can. Soon, your ashes will join the sepulture waiting for you in the gardens of Marrakech.
It is to you that I address myself to you who do not hear me, who do not answer me. Everyone here is listening to me, but you alone can not.
How not to remember? I remember that first meeting and the ones that followed. I remember the day we decided - but do we decide in those cases? - that our roads combine to join and make one. I remember announcing on your hospital bed at Val-de-Grace that you were no longer at the head of the fashion house that was using you and I remember your reaction: "So did you tell me, we are going to found one together and you will direct it. " I remember the hunt for money, the pitfalls that popped up everywhere, but for you I would have faced more risks. I remember your first collection under your name, rue Spontini, and your tears at the end which testified to months of doubt, research, anguish. Once again glory had come to wind you off. Then years passed and with them the collections. As they passed quickly, these years, and as your collections shaped their era. Of all the couturiers, you were the only one to open the book of your life, to start it in chapter I, to write it, and to write the word Fin. You had understood that the time that would be called would require neither rigor nor requirement and, after a last show at the Center Pompidou that will remain in the memory of fashion, you left forever this job that you had served so much and that you had loved so much. You never consoled yourself for this separation. You had a passion for fashion design but, as sometimes happens in some couples, divorce was inescapable. This does not prevent you from continuing to love or suffer. I want to tell you, who was your closest witness, that among all the qualities I have most admired in you are precisely honesty, rigor and demanding. You could have sometimes run in fashion but you never thought about it, true to the style that was yours. You were right, since this style is the one found everywhere. Maybe not on fashion podiums, but on the streets of the world. Your com plicity with women, whom you loudly claimed and whom you were most proud of, never stopped. With Chanel - for if a name is to be quoted today, and only one, it is his - Chanel who had designated you as his successor, you will have been the most important fashion designer of the eighth century. She's from the first half, you from the second. On the marble plaque waiting for you, below your name, I wanted to engrave "French couturier". Couturier you have been, oh how! You have built a work whose echoes will be heard for a long time, because you could not be anything else. French, like a verse by Ronsard, a parterre of Le Nôtre, a page by Ravel, a painting by Matisse. Pascal, who did not like him, reproaches Montaigne for preferring his work to everything. It is Montaigne who is right. It is your work that has allowed you to live, to support the anxiety that was yours from your youngest age. The artist is thus made to find salvation and reasons for hope only in creation. How, about you, do not quote Proust? You belonged, indeed, "to that great and lamentable family of the nervous which is the salt of the earth. All that we know well comes from the nervous. It was they, and not others, who founded the religions and composed the masterpieces. The world will never know what it owes them and especially what they have suffered to give it to him. Here, Yves, what I wanted to tell you. We will have to leave now and I do not know how to do it. Because I will never leave you - have we never left? - even if I know that we will no longer look at the sun setting behind the gardens of Agdal, that we will not share more emotion in front of a painting or an object of art. Yes, all that I know, but I also know that I will never forget what I owe you and that one day I will join you under the Moroccan palm trees. To leave you, Yves, I want to tell you my admiration, my deep respect and my love.

December 25, 2008
I have just reread this speech I delivered at Saint Roch Church on the day of your funeral. Basically, it's a letter I sent you. A public letter, but a letter all the same. No more than yesterday you do not hear me today. So why do I want to write to you, to follow you with this dialogue that I started six months ago? I would not know how to say it. In any case, I will do it. First Christmas without you. We were not particularly fond of this party, were we? Moreover, we have always stayed in Paris because of the haute couture collection. I am in Marrakech, in this house which was ours and which is only mine now, where everything reminds me of our life, tells me our story. You know, it's not nothing fifty years aligned one after the other and my memories are blurred. What were we doing in 1958? It was our first Christmas and I can not remember anything. We lived in Dauphine Square. Shortly before we had heard Callas at the Opera during this famous gala which will be anchored in our memories. But this Christmas, this Christmas, I do not remember. I went to sit down - I go every day - in front of the memorial I had raised for you. There were many tourists, visitors. Some take pictures. They do not bother me. I'm glad they read your name, they think of you. That's what I wanted. I know that you will not read this letter or those that will follow but what does it matter, I write to you, even if it is to myself that I address myself. Certainly, these letters are for you; it's a way to continue our dialogue. It's my way of continuing to talk to you. To you who do not hear me and who will not answer me.

December 26, 2008
I listened to the favorite Beethoven quartet, opus 132, played with a scalpel precision by the PraUk quartet. You know, it's wonderful to carry with you in a box, small as a pack of cigarettes, all the music of the mode. In any case, a big part. It's the time you liked: sun never offended, nights and nights chilly. I decided tonight to remake your room and live there. The day before yesterday, after the Christmas dinner, I was sad to leave this house to reach the apartment that I settled in the Majorelle garden. Especially now. I will go back and try to live there. I'll ask Bill for a new plan. He is not in great shape, far from it, but he will be happy to work again. To get back to my iPod, I often listen to the sextet of Brahms that we played for the Mass of your funeral in Saint-Roch. I read - reread - Flaubert. Volume I of his Correspondence. Exciting, even if I prefer the last, the year of his death, the year of the death of so many of his friends, of George Sand. But what a wonder this man who trans-ported his shell of genius, from Croisset to Cairo. Pierre is coming tomorrow.

December 27, 2008
Flaubert: "The Nile is flat like a river of steel. I read this sentence several times. "New York is a standing city," said Celine. Theseare definitive words. Forgive me, but I can not write you anymore length.

December 30, 2008
I'm in the plane that brings us back to Paris. We pass over Tanger. We can see our house. Finally, guess it. This trip, Yves, wehave done so together so often for more than forty years. This stay at Marrakech was nice and difficult. Nice, because I loved those who were the  difficult, because you were present everywhere and at any time. I get used to itrai. I'm not unaware that you did not like going to Marrakech any more. But what did you like? You had also detached yourself from Deauville. You were only refusal, rejection. Everything was an excuse for your grumbling, for your bad mood. Around you, your loved ones - the only ones you tolerated - did not blame you. Do I have any Never Wanted ? I will not hide that it was rough sometimes. But after everything, a long time ago that I had accepted everything, tolerated, because you could not do anything to face, the least obstacle made you stumble, triggered your ire. you have lived the last twenty-five years of your life - it's twenty-five years - caparisoned, away from reality, safe from the world. The truth is that you never recovered from those dark years and those who saw you all the days knew that you were not wrong to call yourself a "living dead". This last part of your life was terrible, full of horrors more or less guessed, in despair, hysterical manifestations, because, hysterical, you was it deeply.

December 31, 2008
This year will end. It will have been that of your death. Your death, which I had known for more than a year that I had been told. Your death, which was, as the doctors had told me, peaceful. Perfect. But are there perfect deaths? Yours arrived at 11:10 pm on Sunday, June 1st. You were in your room, in your bed, as you would have wished. I never told you about your illness What's the point ? You have not undergone any treatment, any of the tortures that often surround the lives of cancer patients. In fact, you just stopped breathing and your eyes opened wide. I closed them. It was finished. I did not cry. It was later, much later that my tears flowed. You died surrounded by those you loved. We decided, Philippe and I, to warn the press and the phone started to ring. I talked about you I said what to say, like a lesson learned. Moujik did not stay in your room. Already, for a few days, he had been avoiding her. Catherine Deneuve came, she went to bed with you to kiss you. I was very moved. Then there was the scattering of your ashes in the rose garden of Villa Oasis, our house in Marrakech, and the erection, in the Majorelle garden, of this memorial imagined by Madison. You know, you can be proud, I've already written to you, to the idea of ​​those thousands of visitors who linger, make you a mute homemage, have a thought for you. I avoided you the cold anonymity of the cemetery and the look of the curious who, in Montparnasse, would have looked for you between Sartre and Duras.

January 3, 2009
I have not written to you in a few days. Too much to do. I dreaded this end of the year, this "Eve" as they say. Sitting at the same table as the last year, I could only think of you. With sadness, but with sweetness, for I knew better than anyone else that death has delivered you from so much anguish. Paris empty, gray, sad. Tomorrow, I'll be showing Baby-lone street to friends. So many memories clash, the best and the worst. It was there that we were happy, where we were unfortunate, where you failed, full of alcohol and cocaine, to kill me with that Greek head that I narrowly avoided. Where the terrible years began.

January 4, 2009
Catherine Putman will die. Entered the hospital for a species of bronchitis, three cancers were discovered. I have a lot of trouble. X ... that I saw yesterday fight with courage against lung cancer. I showed the street of Babylon as I told you. The boiler was broken. Cold of beggars. Bare garden. Heaven clinging to the roofs. Dismal. I listened with Peter to a young German pianist, Martin Helmchen, to play Schubert's Sonata and the musical Moments. We do not forget Radu Lupu, but it's excellent. 

January 6, 2009
I just got bad news from Bill. Cerebral hemorrhage. he is in intensive care at the Marrakech hospital. Critical state. Do you remember of those Moroccan days where life was offered to us as a gift? I would like as long as you remember, that you do not believe in the need of the misfortune. Alas, I know you and I know how much you enjoyed playing with the worst, the black depression. I have known all this and these bursts of false joy, these useless jets, these leaps into the unknown to better fall like a puppet disarticulated. And I was there, I followed you, I tried to help you. You know I measure my share of responsibility. Do not think I reject my mistakes. I you have protected everything and probably too much. Without knowing it, I have infantilized you and, just as you have been addicted to drugs, so have you been to me. I au You must have weaned me off. I did not do it. It was our way of life our history. Our love story. The roles had been distributed as soon as the beginning and we kept them until the end. I have often repro-ket. It was too late. Let's also say that it suited me, as you know tidying. There is no victim or culprit, or it must be admitted that there had two victims and two guilty? I just made an admission that I I always hid Did I understand that the first night we met, during this dinner given by Marie-Louise Bousquet, at the Cloche d'Or? It's possible. I remember my trouble and yours. I remember almost kissing you on the face when I brought you home late
in the night. Like everything went quickly after! Do you remember? When I think back to those early months of 1958, I wonder where I found the strength to end the eight years spent with Bernard, I who worship fidelity. I'm talking about the heart. Yes, everything went fast. Like in a theater during rehearsals, my house is half empty. The movers came and took almost everything. Do not worry, I'm not like Firs at the end of La Cerisaie: I do not believe myself abandoned.

January 7, 2009
I reread my letter yesterday. "Seal our destiny. What a strange expression that would have meant having a seal affixed to you. The truth is much simpler: we loved each other, we tried to unite our two lives and, surprisingly, it worked for fifty years. Sometimes we stumbled, we got our feet in the carpet, we broke one leg, one arm, but fifty years later we were still there and we had not left each other. Maybe that's crazy love. The love of two crazy people. I tried to keep you company, and I knew how to love elsewhere, but all the paths brought me back to you. You did the same thing. Yet jealousy has never given us up. Which is rather incomprehensible. But who can understand and what is there to understand? I always said that if I did not leave you it was because of our fashion house, which was not true. I did not leave you simply because I could not.  At the time of Madison I could have done it, I almost did it. Finally it was he who got tired, who left. You had won once more. Do you remember this Christmas in Deauville in 1987 when I announced my rout? You told me, magnanimous: "I pity you because I know you and I guess how much you had to invest. I was moved but I confess I wondered if it was not a way - your way - of getting me to the bottom. It does not matter. It was the terrible time when you were hiding glasses of whiskey behind the curtains. Yves, you're not angry, are you, if I oblige you to remember those old memories?

January 8, 2009
I'm going to bed, it's late. I unfortunately have a bad news to announce to you: Bill is dead. The old friends of old Morocco have gone away: Adolpho, Fernando, Joe, you and now Bill. Who will be the next one ?

January 10, 2009
I'm writing you from the plane that takes me to Marrakech. We're burying Bill on Monday. A retired American pastor who lives there will celebrate the cult. Bill has named Christopher and me as executors. We are now above Gibraltar. We had always said that someday we would visit this piece of rock, but to make you move was the work of Hercules. Hercules who nevertheless came to Tangier. So we never went there. Do not take it for a reproach, the most beautiful travels are immobile and you have traveled enough in your creation. We saw it well in this exhibition that I called "Extraordinary Journeys". He was there, among others, your genius: to draw your inspiration in countries where you had never been. Last year when I visited Rajasthan, I was struck by the accuracy of your clothes in the Indian collection that you made. You had invented everything and everything was true. Do you remember this word from Oscar Wilde: "Before Turner there was no fog in London"? It's up to artists to show us the world. And you were an artist. I'm sending you this quatrain wrapping around my dear Marot: Spring and my beautiful summer / Have made the jump out the window. / More are not they what they were, / The cold of winter penetrates me. Maybe it's because I'm going to bury Bill that I'm thinking of my winter. Whether I think about it or not, he is there and knocks on the door. I pretend to be deaf and do not open it. One day, however, he will force the door. And when you think that does not prevent me from doing work everywhere! If all this is not to thwart destiny and misplace it, I do not know what it is.

January 11, 2009